---
title: Democratic Confederalism
author: temp_w4rp
layout: post
published: true
---

The approach towards Democratic Confederalism, also known as Apoism, is based on three pillars: democracy, ecology and female emancipation. Today, it is spearheaded by the Kurdish People; their project fittingly called “The Kurdish Project”. Democratic Confederalism is largely based on Bookchin’s theories on social ecology, except Ocalan put more of a focus into feminism, and so you might see Bookchin’s influences throughout. Ocalan hopes that these principles would set out the limitations of the ‘communal economy’ in this democratic autonomy. The councils, communes and cooperatives, these are generally separated by Rojava’s current “cantons” which are just various regions without any real state or government controlling the people, are building this social economy. Ocalan has said about this social economy “The use value must be greater than the exchange value.” So we can be sure that the social economy is one in which the needs of the people are secured away from the monopoly of the means of production. The social economy has four main characteristics: a lack of centralization, it achieves industrial and ecological integration, it is open to all ecological activities and it is based upon what Ocalan believes are moral values.
 
Apoism is about making people self-organized and self-governed, and that every individual has a say on how things are produced, consumed and distributed. This is done through the use of councils at every level: neighborhood, village, district, city and regional, however, organizations for women, youth and other specific groups also have a say on the decision-making process. This movement asserts that the minds and hands of women are needed to reorganize the economy; the movement claims along with this that an economy directed by women will also be the economy that prioritizes basic-needs and utilities. The Kurdish Movement also says that an economy in which utilities and basic-needs are prioritized, would not directly seek profit and therefore be the most ecological.
 
Lets focus on the three pillars of this movement, starting with democracy. The levels of councils start at neighborhood assemblies, then city assembly, then province assembly then finishing with the Democratic Society Congress. These councils are designed to create democratic autonomy in which people govern themselves and organizing themselves with communes and assemblies at the lowest level. Democratic Confederalism is used to describe these assemblies and communes joining together in a confederation.
 
These communes can include whole villages or huge areas of a city. This is the base level. On top of that are the Neighborhood Councils, which are made up of from 7-30 communes. On top of that are the District Councils, which are made up of representatives from the whole city and surrounding area, and the board of district council is known as TEV-DEM. Political parties come into play at this level. At District Council level, most of the work is done through committees. These committees are: Defence, Economics, Free Society, Justice, Political, Civil Society, Ideology and Women’s Council. The final level is called the People’s Council of West Kurdistan and is made up of all the district councils and 11 people from each canton. TEV-DEM is also in play at this level.
All organizations formed by communes or councils, like a co-op, have two hev-seroks, who are essentially co-leaders, and it is encouraged that one is female and the other is male; but that's not enforced. Now these two hev-seroks would be in charge of completing the task they were set, this includes getting the experts necessary, organizing the project and executing it.
 
Now let’s move onto the ecological pillar. Ocalan places ecology and environment as one of the most important issues facing the Kurdish people. He says that the social economy and community must pay attention to the impact of production on the environment and health, as well as justice for the workers. Along with other materialist and post-colonial places, Rojava’s place of importance for ecology is a consequence from anti-capitalism, which is seen as a liberation tool to free resources from exploitation. As we mentioned before, Ocalan took many of Bookchin’s ideas on social ecology and applied it in the middle east social economy context. So this means that Democratic Confederalism is centered around having mutual respect for all aspects of life, and prevents ecological problems by fixing and changing the social issues which Bookchin says cause ecological problems.
 
One of these social issues is social hierarchy, and Democratic Confederalism clearly squashes hierarchy with its co-leadership system, communes, and direct democracy. It is quite easy to see how Ocalan put social ecology and his Bookchin influences into the pillars of Democratic Confederalism.

The final pillar of Democratic Confederalism is female emancipation. Ocalan ensures women are equal to men in this system by protecting their rights, one example being how women are ensured various councils on the same subject matters as men, as well as this, and the founding of women’s councils was a very important step forward for self-empowerment. The popular council took this declaration of women’s will and incorporated it into a convention with the municipal government. So now, for example, in cases of domestic violence, the council imposes sanctions on the violent husband. This convention exists because of the women’s councils and is valid in every Kurdish city and town where the BDP holds power. As in this example, the struggle for the liberation of gender is affecting tangible changes in people’s lives.
Because of these councils and co-ops, women’s work and activism is respected and fights alongside the Kurdish movement for independence. One member of the Amed Women’s Academy said that “the state reproduces its hierarchal structure in the family”, and so you can see how within Democratic Confederalism that is gotten ridden of. The same woman said that “Kurdish families aren’t really open to the new system, Democratic Autonomy.” You can see how women, youths and people supporting female emancipation are spearheading the Kurdish struggle, because Apoism, the ideology, is about the liberation from hierarchy, and one way is socially, in the emancipation of women.

So to summarize, you could say that Democratic Confederalism is a libertarian socialist ideology that places importance in the environment, women and direct democracy. It is an ideology in which self-empowerment and self-governance are key, and in which the people organize themselves and the economy is communal and in itself regulated.
 

